---
editor_options:
  markdown:
    wrap: 72
---

# Building Multidimensional Confirmatory Factor Analysis Models {.unnumbered}

Use the lavaan tutorial https://www.lavaan.ugent.be/tutorial/cfa.html to help you carry out the tasks below and answer the questions. 

## Task and Questions {-}

### Task 1 {-}

Fit a two-factor model of the "mental health" items, ("nervous", "down", "peace", "sad", "happy"). One factor is to be indicated by the positive items ("happy", "peace"), and one factor indicated by the negative items ("nervous", "down", "sad").

:::question
1. What results suggest that this model is a good model?   
2. What results suggest that this model is a poor model?  
3. Is this model preferable to a unidimensional model based upon a Likelihood Ratio Test?  
:::

### Task 2 {-}

Fit a one-factor model of the "mental health" items, ("nervous", "down", "peace", "sad", "happy"), just like you did in the previous practical. However, in this model, allow the residual variances for the items happy and peace to correlate with each other.

### Task 3 {-}

The two-dimensional model we've looked at earlier assumes that each item  contains information about just one latent factor - i.e. each item has  only one factor loading. This is unlikely to be true in many circumstances  especially when the items relate to nested concepts, e.g. the overarching concept of "mood" encapsulates the more specific  concepts "positive mood" and "negative mood".  You will re-cast our two-dimensional mood model as a bifactor model, which allows for this.   

See if you can fit a model with the following specifications:   

-  A general factor "mood" indicated by all five items;  
-  A specific factor "positive mood" indicated by the items "happy" and "peace";    
-  The correlation between the general and specific factors is fixed to zero.   

*This model represents the correlation between the latent factors by allowing the two positive mood items to have two factor loading each, one on the general factor and one on the specific factor.*

:::question
How do you interpret the fit and coefficients of this model?
:::
